add docs about adding ops to thunder (#149)
Lightning-AI/lightning-thunder: docs/source/advanced/contrib_thunder.rst

*Thunder's* primitives are similar to `PyTorch’s <https://pytorch.org>`_
`primTorch primitives <https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/tree/main/torch/_prims>`_,
and are based on `JAX’s <https://github.com/google/jax>`_
`jax.lax operations <https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/jax.lax.html>`_.

Primitives have several parts, as defined by the ``make_prim`` function.
Most importantly they have an ``id``, a ``name``, and a ``meta`` function.
The meta function performs error checking and maps the metadata (like ``dtype``, ``shape``, ``device``) of inputs to the primitive metadata of outputs.
For operations that are part of a class, like the elementwise unary or reduction operations, they often share a common meta function.
More unique operations, like ``slice``, define their own
`meta functions <https://github.com/Lightning-AI/lightning-thunder/blob/888b46324462fba70f93d5017bc0d99025f05091/thunder/core/prims.py#L2812>`_.

The actual execution of primitive operations is handled by executors like
`nvFuser <https://github.com/NVIDIA/Fuser>`_ or
`PyTorch <https://pytorch.org>`_ – more on that in a moment.

Before adding a primitive, check with the team on its design.

> It is appropriate to add primitives when necessary to describe the semantics of an operation or to improve the numerical accuracy or speed of operations.

Author: Well, it is, because it is necessary :)

> It is appropriate to add primitives when necessary to describe the semantics of an operation or to improve the numerical accuracy or speed of operations.

Reviewer: I mean would you always add a prim if it makes it faster? What if it's barely faster? This is why I ask if it's that clear.

There is a tension with the design of primitive operations.
On one hand, fewer primitive operations can make program transformation, and execution easier.
Fewer primitives means fewer transformation rules – since transformation rules are defined on primitives – and a smaller interface with executors.
On the other hand, too few primitive operations may make it hard, or impossible, to express all the operations that practitioners are interested in.
Too few primitive operations may also make it difficult to execute programs quickly and numerically accurately.

For example, the ``expm1`` operation can mathematically be defined in terms of the ``exp`` and subtraction operations,
and so it does not need to be a primitive to enable any functionality.
Many libraries, including `C++’s standard library <https://en.cppreference.com/w/c/numeric/math/expm1>`_,
still define an ``expm1`` operation for numerical accuracy, and so ``expm1`` is a
`primitive <https://github.com/Lightning-AI/lightning-thunder/blob/888b46324462fba70f93d5017bc0d99025f05091/thunder/core/prims.py#L1791>`_ in *Thunder*.

-----------------

> The Core Language

Reviewer: This section describes core langauge very well, but it is missing describing the motivation for having this extra layer instead of merging it into prims. (I don't know what the motivation is, otherwise I would make a more precise suggestion)

Author: But the motivation is there, nor? Prims are simple, do not do promotions/broadcasting and such. Their goal, is, ideally, just compute. But we are not very consistent with that, to be honest. We do have some quite powerful prims.

Reviewer: Having the core language as a more powerful set of operators makes sense if the other higher-level languages (torch, ...) decompose into clang ops, not just prims.
Is that the case? I was under the impression that this isn't the case.

This is why I never understood the existence of the clang. Is it in case people want to write code with these operators directly instead of torch?

Author: Well, we can have high-level functions which makes our lives easier and not bound to the torch interface.

Reviewer: Let's mention that here then, that is valid motivation

Author: I did re-read the sections. I believe they explain things well enough already. So, we have simple prims, and we have the torch lang that is used directly to be mapped into when seeing a torch op. Clang and prims are used to make that map happen. This is it there is to it. All other degrees of freedom are following from the "definitions".

(for example, ``clang.foo`` might call ``clang.bar`` which calls ``prims.bar``).

Core language operations are intended to be common functionality that’s useful when
defining practitioner-facing language like ``torch`` or ``numpy``.
Many of these operations are just wrappers around primitive operations.
For example, the elementwise binary primitives are as simple as possible, so they don’t perform broadcasting or type promotion.
The core language elementwise binary operations, however, do perform broadcasting and type promotion.

Before adding a core language operation consider if the functionality expressed is universal enough.

As a style note, operations in *Thunder* should defer as much error checking as possible.
For example, if a primitive’s meta function will perform an error check for ``X``,
then the core language operation that calls it should generally not also check for ``X``.

------------------
The Torch Language
------------------
To translate ``torch`` operations into something that *Thunder* understands we define a
`torch language <https://github.com/Lightning-AI/lightning-thunder/blob/main/thunder/torch/__init__.py>`_.

> Operations in the ``torch`` language should be written as if a practitioner were writing them,

Reviewer: What does

> as if a practitioner were writing them

mean more precisely?

Author: Killed off.

and they should reflect the behavior of their corresponding torch operations (small deviations are sometimes OK).

> When a program is interpreted, torch operations are remapped into these operations, which ultimately call primitive operations.

Reviewer: I would expand this section a bit, also adding or linking to an easy example that shows how a torchlang op matches a pytorch operator and how it calls different prims etc. Especially since this is the most popular language for our users.

Reviewer: Or hint at the example below (I hadn't reached it when I posted the above) for those who want to see it already

Author: I will update outline the structure and how it is supposed to be read.

----------------

> Language Context

Reviewer: Links to code would be helpful in this section.

----------------
In the ``core`` and ``torch`` languages functions are decorated to set a *language context* and – for ``torch`` operations – to describe
how to map operations like ``torch.foo`` into ``thunder.torch.foo``.

The language context determines what properties and methods tensor objects have.
For example, when ``a + b`` is written, the language context decides what that addition means.
Or when ``a.size`` is used, the language context determines what that means (and it’s different in PyTorch and NumPy).

---------------------------------------

> Adding operations to the Torch executor

Reviewer: This header could be given more weights since it marks the "Theory is over, let's look at example" boundary

---------------------------------------
Now that we are familiar with the hierarchy of operations and the underlying language contexts, let's see some
examples of adding operations.

For simplicity, we only cover adding operations to the ``torch`` executor.
The sections below are meant to be read **sequentially**.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Adding a primitive
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
A good example of adding a primitive operation to the ``torch`` executor is
the `PR #136 <https://github.com/Lightning-AI/lightning-thunder/pull/136>`_
which adds support for `torch.Tensor.unfold <https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/torch.Tensor.unfold.html>`_.

Let's outline some of its key parts.

The following added (emphasized) lines to
`thunder/core/prims.py <https://github.com/Lightning-AI/lightning-thunder/blob/main/thunder/core/prims.py>`_

.. code-block:: python
   :emphasize-lines: 5
   :lineno-start: 152

   SLICE = auto()
   SQUEEZE = auto()
   TRANSPOSE = auto()
   UNFOLD = auto()
   VIEW = auto()
   # Memory layout prims (Experimental)
   STRIDE_ORDER = auto()

.. code-block:: python

>    :emphasize-lines: 1-18

Reviewer: This is highlightning the entire snippet

Author: So, I used it to indicate the added by the contributor lines. It is possible to get that highlighted similar to how git shows that. But I would need to manipulate Sphinx a bit more, not an expert there. What do you think, @carmocca . Or do you think that dropping any highlight is better?

Reviewer: Dropping it is probably the best option in the cases where it's the whole snippet. If you want to highlight only a subset then I would keep it.

   :lineno-start: 3082

   def unfold_meta(a: TensorProxy, /, dim: int, size: int, step: int) -> TensorProxy:
       dim = utils.canonicalize_dim(a.ndim, dim)
       max_size = 1 if a.ndim == 0 else a.shape[dim]

       utils.check(
       size <= max_size, lambda: f"Maximum size for tensor at dimension {dim} is {max_size} but size is {size}"
       )
       utils.check(size >= 0, lambda: f"Size is {size} but must be >= 0")
       utils.check(step > 0, lambda: f"Step is {step} but must be > 0")

       shape = list(a.shape)
       shape.append(size)
       shape[dim] = (shape[dim] - size) // step + 1

       return TensorProxy(like=a, shape=shape)

    unfold = make_prim(PrimIDs.UNFOLD, "unfold", meta=unfold_meta, tags=(OpTags.SHAPE_OP,))

> register a primitive symbol ``unfold`` using ``make_prim`` with ``id=PrimIDs.UNFOLD``,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above registers a primitive symbol ``unfold`` using ``make_prim`` with ``id=PrimIDs.UNFOLD``,
```

``name=unfold``, and ``meta=unfold_meta``. One can see that ``unfold_meta`` follows the signature
of the underlying ``torch.Tensor.unfold`` operation
(so that the primitive is directly modeled after the PyTorch operation)
with the only exception of expecting a ``TensorProxy``
and not the ``torch.Tensor`` as its input. The rest of the function checks the inputs and returns
a ``TensorProxy`` of the appropriate shape. ``like=a`` means that the output will inherit the meta-data
like ``device`` and ``dtype`` from ``a``. The primitive is also tagged with ``tags=(OpTags.SHAPE_OP,)``,
and, therefore, is associated with shape-based operations.
We use tags to additionally group operations for group-specific operation optimizations inside *Thunder*.

> Additionally, the `clang <https://github.com/Lightning-AI/lightning-thunder/blob/main/thunder/clang/__init__.py>`_ gets updated

Reviewer: Why? What's the advantage?

.. code-block:: python

>    :emphasize-lines: 1-3

Reviewer: Again, is there a benefit to highlighting everything?

   :lineno-start: 1119

   @clangop()
   def unfold(a: TensorProxy, /, dim: int, size: int, step: int) -> TensorProxy:
       return prims.unfold(a, dim, size, step)

And while this symbol directly calls into the primitive and is very simple, a more involved

> example of ``clang.slice_in_dim``

Reviewer: This is interesting, but it distracts away from the unfold example. What if it's moved to the clang theory section?

Once the symbol is created, we need to tell *Thunder* how to *execute* it.
Since we are updating the ``torch`` executor, the following lines are added to the
`executors/torchex.py <https://github.com/Lightning-AI/lightning-thunder/blob/main/thunder/executors/torchex.py>`_ file

.. code-block:: python
   :emphasize-lines: 2
   :lineno-start: 465

   unbind = _register_torch_operation("unbind")
   unfold = _register_torch_operation("unfold", module=torch.Tensor)
   unsqueeze = _register_torch_operation("unsqueeze")

.. code-block:: python
   :emphasize-lines: 2
   :lineno-start: 536

   _register_implementation(prims.transpose, checker=_always_executable, execution_transform=_transpose_prim_transform)
   _register_implementation(prims.unfold, unfold, checker=_always_executable)
   _register_implementation(prims.view, view, checker=_always_executable)

the first one registers a new symbol that is directly tied to the ``torch.Tensor.unfold``, and the second
associates this symbol with ``prims.unfold`` upon execution unless the ``checker`` fails
(``checker`` is useful, for example, for checking PyTorch versions).

> Having ``checker=_always_executable`` always greenlights this association, and, hence,

Reviewer: Somewhat of an offtopic question to your PR:

Why do we run checks on the meta functions for the operators instead of in the checkers?

For instance, imagine we had 2 executors who define the same operator where the first one is stricter about what it allows. If the meta function for the first one does a `utils.check(something)` then it would not give an opportunity to the second executor. As far as I understand, if this is done with a checker then it is supported.

So when do we recommend customizing the meta function vs the checker?

Reviewer: I understand this but my question is, why do we even let it claim symbols whose inputs are not going to be accepted by the meta function? AFAIK the checker also has access to the inputs.

Maybe a question for @mruberry too

whenever the ``torch`` executor tries to execute ``prims.unfold``, it executes ``torch.Tensor.unfold``.

The mapping of the ``prims.unfold`` symbol to ``torch.Tensor.unfold`` is very simple since the inputs
to ``prims.unfold`` can directly be passed to ``torch.Tensor.unfold`` without any additional pre-preprocessing
(association between ``TensorProxy`` and ``torch.Tensor`` is handled automatically by the ``torch`` executor).

> This is not the case with any operation, however, and sometimes the symbol's interface has to undergo

Reviewer: Did you mean?

```suggestion
This is not the case with all operations, however, and sometimes the symbol's interface has to undergo
```

Author: Sorry, are these not equivalent?

Reviewer: My non-english-native brain prefers "all", but feel free to keep yours

> This is not the case with any operation, however, and sometimes the symbol's interface has to undergo

Reviewer: Would this be clearer?

```suggestion
This is not the case with any operation, however, and sometimes the primitive implementation has to undergo
```

Author: No, I do not think so. The primitive implementation would refer to the executor's interface, right? And we map our Thunder's interface to that of the executor.

       torch_dtype: None | torch.dtype = to_torch_dtype(dtype)

       return full(shape, fill_value, device=torch_device, dtype=torch_dtype)

.. code-block:: python
   :lineno-start: 421

   _register_implementation(prims.full, checker=_always_executable, execution_transform=_full_transform)

show us how to accomplish that with the ``execution_transform`` argument of ``_register_implementation``
where the *Thunder* meta-data like ``device``, ``dtype`` is converted to the corresponding PyTorch meta-data.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Testing the Operation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
In the previous section we saw an example of adding a primitive operation.
However, it is not guaranteed that the operation performs as expected.
We need to test it!

Operators are typically tested by adding an OpInfo for them.
See `here <https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/blob/7a192cc51c7172860efd35413acf9a8b9aafd2c9/torch/testing/_internal/opinfo/core.py#L341>`_
to better understand how OpInfos work.
OpInfo contains metadata describing an operator, a sample input generator,
a sample generator for erroneous inputs that is used for testing handling exceptions/meta function correctness, and test directives.

> It’s used to automatically generate a variety of tests, including tests that verify the operator’s behavior is consistent with its reference implementations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It’s used to automatically generate a variety of tests, most importantly tests that verify the operator’s behavior is consistent with its reference implementations.
```

It is important to determine whether you need to add ``test_directives`` in order to skip tests or expect failures of tests.

* Skip (``pytest.mark.skip``): Skips are needed when something is not implemented by an executor or for a device.
* Expected Failures (``pytest.mark.xfail``): Expected failures indicate that an executor has implemented some aspect of an operation but its behavior is incorrect.

An example of OpInfo for ``prims.unfold`` from the `PR #136 <https://github.com/Lightning-AI/lightning-thunder/pull/136>`_
added to `thunder/tests/opinfos.py <https://github.com/Lightning-AI/lightning-thunder/blob/main/thunder/tests/opinfos.py>`_

.. code-block:: python

>    :emphasize-lines: 1-38

Reviewer: Again, this looks odd

.. code-block:: bash

  $ pytest thunder/tests/test_ops.py -k unfold

Another example of an OpInfo with specified ``test_directives``

.. code-block:: python
   :lineno-start: 577

   acos_opinfo = OpInfo(
       ltorch.acos,
       domain=(-1, 1),
       sample_input_generator=elementwise_unary_generator,
       torch_reference=_elementwise_unary_torch(torch.acos),
       test_directives=(
           # Torch doesn't support CPU float16 or complex32 acos
           DecorateInfo(
               pytest.mark.xfail,
               "test_core_vs_torch_consistency",
               dtypes=(datatypes.float16, datatypes.complex32),
               devicetypes=(devices.DeviceType.CPU,),
           ),
       ),
   )
   elementwise_unary_ops.append(acos_opinfo)

We strive for *Thunder* to be of the highest quality possible,
so it is always a good idea to be very thorough when it comes to testing.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Adding grad support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Operations are not differentiable by default, unless they are implemented as compositions
of differentiable operations (related to updating the ``torch`` language. More on that later).

> When an operation is a composition of other operations, we say that this operation is being *decomposable*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When an operation is a composition of other operations, we say that this operation is *decomposable*.
```

being differentiable. Note that *Thunder* interleaves forward and backward computations in grad transforms.
Take a look at the lines ``val_grad = get_grad(val)``, which extracts the in-flowing backward gradient
for ``val``, and ``put_grad(a, a_grad)`` which sets the backward gradient for the input ``a``.

Do you see that comment about the missing ``scatter``? You could be the one who implements it! :)

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Updating the Torch Language
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
`The Torch Language`_ operations are the "highest"-level operations and, as such, are *decomposable*.
If the missing operation can be decomposed into already existing operations, then
`thunder/torch/__init__.py <https://github.com/Lightning-AI/lightning-thunder/blob/main/thunder/torch/__init__.py>`_
is where its implementation is to be placed.

For example, consider the `PR #100, <https://github.com/Lightning-AI/lightning-thunder/pull/100>`_ that adds
support for the Hardswish activation function.
The function is implemented in `thunder/torch/__init__.py <https://github.com/Lightning-AI/lightning-thunder/blob/main/thunder/torch/__init__.py>`_

.. code-block:: python
    :lineno-start: 1211

>     :emphasize-lines: 1-9

Reviewer: Another one

    @torchsymbol(torch.nn.functional.hardswish, id="torch.hardswish", is_method=False)
    def hardswish(a: TensorProxy, /, inplace: bool = False) -> TensorLike:
        utils.check(not inplace, lambda: f"hardswish only supports inplace=False", exception_type=NotImplementedError)
        utils.check(
            dtypes.is_float_dtype(a.dtype),
            lambda: f"hardswish only supports floating point dtypes, got {a.dtype}",
            exception_type=ValueError,
        )
        return a * relu6(a + 3) / 6

> Note the checks (*Thunder* does not support in-place operations yet) and that ``hardswish`` is a composition
> of the defined in the ``torch`` language ``relu6`` operation and the language context-specific binary operations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note the checks (*Thunder* does not support in-place operations yet) and that ``hardswish`` is a composition
of the ``relu6`` operation (defined in the ``torch`` language) and the language context-specific binary operations
```

> of the defined in the ``torch`` language ``relu6`` operation and the language context-specific binary operations

Reviewer: I understand that you mean binary here in the sense that you have two arguments. But for the unaware, it would be better to change the wording here for those who think of the numeral system

Author: It is an advanced section after all :) Do you mean the usage of explicit algebraic op names?
